(MUSIC)
LIFE SEEMS DIFFERENT NOW,
I'M ELEVEN YEARS-OLD.
I DATE BAD GIRLS,
SEVEN INCHES BICEPS,
I GET MAD OVER
STUPID STUFF.
I AM A LADIES MAN.
LIFE SEEMS DIFFERENT,
THAT'S RIGHT.
(MUSIC)
HELLO
HEY
YOU RECORDING?
TEEN SPECIES HAS
SPENT TWO YEARS WATCHING
TEENAGERS GROW-UP.
WE'VE SEEN HUGE EMOTIONAL
AND PHYSICAL CHANGES.
(SCREAM)
WITNESSED BEHAVIOR BAD
AND GOOD AND EXPLORED THE
TRAUMATIC PASSAGE FROM
CHILD TO ADULT IN FINE
SCIENTIFIC DETAIL
(MUSIC)
TEENAGERS HAVE TALKED
TO US WITH UNPARALLELED
FRANKNESS AND INTIMACY
NO COMMENT.
TONIGHT WE
EXAME THE BOYS.
WE FILMED FIVE VOLUNTEERS
BETWEEN THE AGES OF ELEVEN
AND SIXTEEN.
THE OLDEST IS JESSIE.
WHY DO TEENAGE BOYS
BECOME OBSESSED WITH SEX.
GIRLS VOICE:
LEAVE ME ALONE.
IN MY MIND ITS LIKE
GIRLS I CAN'T EVEN CONCENTRATE.
THE YOUNGEST IS ANDY.
IT'S GOING TO HAPPEN
I'M GOING TO GROW UP
WHETHER I LIKE IT OR NOT.
MARK'S THIRTEEN BUT
HE DOESN'T LOOK IT .
WHY AM I SO SHORT?
THIS SMALL LITTLE MIDGET.
I CAT GROW.
WHAT DAMAGE DOES BEING
THIS SHORT DO TO A TEENAGE
BOY.
NARRATOR: CAN DOMINICK
STOP HIS VOICE FROM BREAKING
AT LEAST FOR A YEAR OR SO.
JUST SLOW DOWN.
OR WILL THE EMOTIONAL
CHANGES OF PUBERTY TRIP
HIM UP.
OH, THAT'S SUCH BULL OX.
WE GET THE INSIDE STORY
ON THE TEENAGE CRIME WAVE
FROM MATTHEW AND FOR THE
REAL LOW DOWN ON BOYS WE
TURN TO THE EXPERTS.
THE GIRLS ARE CONSTANTLY
CHECKING OUT THE BOYS.
BOYS ARE
HORRIBLE BECAUSE,
DISGUSTING, THEY SMELL,
THEY'LL PICK THEIR
NOSETHEY'LL BRAG,
I THINK THEY'RE JUST
THMALE OF THE SPECIES
AND THAT'S JUST
THE WAY THEYRE.
FIRST WE MEET ANDY.
I AM ANDY WEISENFELD,
I'M ELEVEN YEARS OLD,
I LIVE IN MANHATTAN, I
LOVE THE SIMPSON'S, DOH,
WHEN I WAS FIRST CHOSEN
FOR THIS SHOW I DIDN'T
KNOW HOW MUCH IN MY
LIFE THEY WOULD GET.
BUT, NOW I UNDERSTAND
HOW IT IS AND I'M LOOKING
FORWARD TO IT A LOT.
IS IT RUNNING?
DOH
ANDY IS JUST BEGINNING
THE JOURNEY THROUGH
ADOLESCENCE.
IN THE MEANTIME HIS
INTERESTS ARE PICAL OF
ANY ELEVEN YEAR-OLD BOY.
COMPUTERS, COMPUTERS,
BOY, IEALLY LIKE
COMPUTERS, ROCKETRY SCIENCE,
IN ROCKETRY, UM
WE BUILD ROCKETS,
IT'S CALLED THE
GIANT FLUFFY BUNNY,
A FRIEND AND I DESIGNED
IT TWO YEARS AGO.
WE LAUNCHED IT AND
IT WENT UP PERFECTLY,
THE PARACHUTE EJECTED AND
IT HAD A GREAT LANDING IN
A TREE.
I'LL ASK THAT EVERY ONE
GETS BEHIND THIS FOR
SAFETY REASONS.
I DON'T WANT ANYBODY
GETTING HURT.
5, 4, 3, 2, 1,AUNCH,
3,2,1, LAUNCH, LAUNCH, LAUNCH.
5, 4, 3, 2, 1, LAUNCH,
IT'S GOING TO WORK
THIS TIME I'M POSITIVE.
AT ELEVEN LIKE MOST
MODERN CHILDREN ANDY HAS
BEEN WELL BRIEFED ABOUT
WHAT TO EXPECT FOR
PUBERTY.
WELL, I'LL PROBABLY
GET TALLER, AND HEAVIER,
MATES START VERY
GRADUALLY AT MY AGE 11.
OR MAYBE EVEN 13.
POSSIBLY EVEN 16.
AT THE GREATEST MAYBE,
A BOY WILL GO THROUGH A
GROWTH SPURT AND MAYBE
GET ACNE OR FACIAL HAIR.
AH, AH
I KW, ALL
OF THAT HAPPENS.
I HAVE FRIENDS
THAT ARE GIRLS.
THERE ARE SEVEN GIRLS IN
MY CLASS AND FIVE BOYS
INCLUDING MYSELF.
PHYSICALLY THE GIRLS ARE
MATURING MUCH FASTER THEN
THE BOYS.
IF YOU LOOK AT ANY GROUP
OF ELEVEN YEAR-OLDS YOU
COULD BE FORGIVEN FOR
THINKING THATHE BOYS ARE
YEARS BEHIND IN THE
RACE TO ADULTHOOD.
BUT, THEY'RE NOT.
THEY START PUBERTY ONLY A
FEW MONTHSFTER GIRLS AND
THEY DEVELOP AT
A SIMILAR SPEED.
IT'S JUST THAT EARLY
CHANGES IN FEMALE SHAPES
ARE MORE OBVIOUS.
AT ELEVEN IT'S ALL STARTED
TO HAPPEN FOR ANDY,
IT'S JUST THAT THE
CHANGES ARE OUT OF SIGHT.
THE CHANGES IN PUBERTY
IN BOYS AND GIRLS ARE
DRIVEN BY THE POWERFUL
CHEMICALS THAT'S CALLED
HORMONES.
DISSOLVED IN THE BLOOD
THEY'RE INVISIBLE.
BUT, THEY MAKE
BEAUTIFUL CRYSTALS.
IN A BOY THE MOST
IMPORTANT IS TESTOSTERONE.
IN THE BLOOD STREAM
THE CONCENTRATION OF
TESTOSTERONE INCREASES
THROUGH-OUT PUBERTY AS IT
DOES SO IT CHANGES
THE WAY BOYS LOOK,
THE WAY THEY SOUND,
EVEN THE WAY THEY THINK.
BUT THE FIRST THING IT
DOES IS TO TRIGGER GROWTH
IN A VERY PRIVATE PLACE.
I'D RATHER
LEAVE THAT OUT.
IN BOYS THE EARLIEST
CHANGE TESTOSTERONE CAUSES
IS GROWTH OF
THE TESTICLES.
AS THEY GROW THE TEXTURE
OF THE SKIN BECOMES
ROUGHER AND THERE IS A
WISPY GROWTH OF PUBLIC
HAIR.
PUBERTY IN BOYS STARTS
HAPPENING ANYTIME BETWEEN
TEN AND FOURTEEN
YEARS-OLD.
OK, COULD YOU
JUST GET LIMBERED UP.
THE VAST MAJORITY HAVE
STARTED BY THE TIME THEY
ARE THIRTEEN, BUT NOT ALL.
THESE BOYS ARE
ALL THIRTEEN,
BUT THERE IS A WIDE RANGE
IN THEIR DEVELOPMENT.
TODAY WE'RE GOING TO
BE LOOKING AT THE STRADDLE
VAULT, WHICH I KNOW MOST
OF YOU HAVE DONE BEFORE.
WE'LL TAKE IT SLOWLY TO
START WITH AND WE'LL SEE
WHAT AREAS WE
CAN IMPROVE ON.
FOR THE LITTLE ONE'S THE
MOST OBVIOUS DIFFERENCE IS
HEIGHT.
I FELT LIKE I WAS
LOOKING UP AT SOME
SKYSCRAPERS.
I'M STILL SMALL I HAVEN'T
EVEN REALLY GOT FACIAL
HAIR ?
AT THE SIDES A BIT
THERE A LITTLE BIT,
YOU CAN SEE THE
LITTLE BLACK BITS,
AND UM I HAVEN'T GOT
ANY HAIRS, PUBIC HAIRS,
AND UM I HAVEN'T GROWN
OBVIOUSLY AND MY VOICE
HASN'T BROKEN.
I'VE JUST STAYED THE
SAME, IT GETS ME CHOKED UP
REALLY CAUSE I WANT
TO GROW BUT, I WANT,
I WANT TO GROW.
"I DON'T WANT TO BE
LITTLE LIKE YOU" HE SAYS.
ADULT HEIGHT IS MOSTLY
DETERMINED BY GENES. MARK'S
MOTHER MIGHT BE SMALL BUT
HIS DAD IS 5 FOOT 10,
1 METER 70, MARK SHOULD
END UP AT LEAST 1, 65
BUT HE HASN'T EVEN
STARTED GROWING YET,
DOES IT REALLY MATTER?
IT DOES TO SOME.
IT'S A BIT WEIRD, IT
FEELS LIKE A REAL TALL
GIRL WITH A SHORT MAN.
ANNOYING LITTLE GUYS
LIKE THAT DRIVE ME MADE.
I TRIED TO
BEAT ONE UP ONCE.
BUT HE TRIPPED ME UP.
BECAUSE HE IS SO SMALL.
MARK IS STILL TRYING TO
LOOK ON THE BRIGHT SIDE.
WHEN YOU'RE SMALL YOU
CAN RUN, YOU CAN JUMP,
YOU CAN FLIP EVEN IF YOU
WANTED TO LAND PERFECTLY
WELL DONE.
TALL PEOPLE
FALL, DOWN THEY GO.
AND AS THEY SAY, "THE BIGGER
THEY ARE THE HARDER THEY FALL".
MUSIC
SO WHEN WILL IT
ALL HAPPEN FOR MARK.
WHEN HE DOES START GROWING
THERE WILL BE ONE SURE
SIGN, HIS FEET.
MUSIC
ANDY'S A YEAR YOUNGER
THAN MARK AND TODAY HE'S
SHOPPING FOR SHOES, AGAIN.
EVERY ONCE AND A WHILE
MY MOM WILL GO "ANDY YOUR
FEET HAVE GROWN
LONGER AND WIDER."
ANDY'S FAST GROWING
FEET ARE A SIGN THAT HE IS
ENTERING A VIGOROUS GROWTH
SPURT THAT WILL TURN HIM
INTO A MAN.
I'VE FOUND THAT I'VE
GROWN A BIT STRONGER
BECAUSE IF MY MOM SO MUCH
AS DARES TO ARM WRESTLE
ME, I CAN CRUSH HER.
ANDY, WAIT UP AND LOOK
AT THE SOME OF THE SHOES.
ANDY'S LOOKING FOR SHOES
FOR SPECIAL OCCASIONS.
I DON'T THINK THIS
IS THE RIGHT PLACE.
OKAY, 7 1/2.
SHOE SIZE IS
A GIVE AWAY,
BECAUSE TEENAGE BODIES ALL
GROW IN THE SAME WAY FROM
THE OUTSIDE IN.
BE RIGHT BACK.
FIRST THE FEET AND HANDS
GROW TO ADULT SIZE.
SIX MONTHS LATER THE ARMS
AND LEGS TAKE OFF AND BOYS
CAN GROW TEN
CENTIMETERS IN ONE YEAR.
THEY LOOK GANGLY AND
AWKWARD AND GROW OUT OF
TROUSERS AT AN
ALARMING RATE.
ONLY AT THE END OF THE
GROWTH SPURT DO THE CHEST
AND TORSO CATCH UP.
BUT, ANDY'S NOT
QUITE THERE YET.
HOW DO THEY FEEL ANDY?
THEY FEEL NICE BUT,
I WANT TO TAKE A LOOK AT
THIS ONE.
LET ME SEE,
STAND STRAIGHT.
THEY LOOK VERY NICE.
I AGREE.
THEY REALLY DO.
DO YOU WANT
TO GET THEM?
YEAH
OK
THE NEW SHOES STAYED
IN PRISTINE CONDITION.
ANDY ONLY WORE THEM TWICE
BEFORE THEY WERE TO SMALL.
ITS THREE O'CLOCK IN
THE MORNING AND DOMINIC IS
HAVING HIS BREAKFAST.
THIS WEEKS BEEN A
BIT BORING BUT THERE'S
SOMETHING REALLY COOL
GOING TO COME UP SOON.
FIRST OF MAY MORNING..
DOMINIC IS TWELVE HE HAS
ONE SPECIAL TALENT AND ITS
UNDER THREAT.
I'M GOING TO GO
TO COLLEGE REALLY, EARLY
AT SIX O'CLOCK I'VE
GOT TO GO UP THE TOWER AND
THEN SING AND THEN COME
BACK DOWN AND THEY WON'T...
SHIT...
DOMINIC'S A CHOIR BOY
WITH ONE OF THE BEST
CHOIRS IN ENGLAND.
ON THE FIRST OF MAY EVERY
YEAR MORVAN COLLEGE CHOIR
SINGS TO THE RISING SUN.
(CHOIR SINGING)
FOR THE LAST THREE YEARS
DOMINIC HAS PRACTICED
SINGING FOR TWENTY
HOURS EVERY WEEK.
I LIKE SINGING MUSIC THAT
GOES LIKE HIGH AND STUFF.
(CHOIR SINGING)
MY ROLE IS
JUST GENERALLY
TO MAKE A
LOT OF NOISE
AND ENCOURAGE EVERYBODY
ELSE TO SING REAL LOUD.
I LIKE HOW MY VOICE IS
NOW. I THINK ITS QUITE GOOD.
HE'S A VERY GOOD
SINGER HE'S GOT A NICE
SHAPE TO THE MOUTH, HE
OPENS MOUTH WELL AND THE
JAW SHAPE IS VERY
GOOD FOR A SINGER.
THERE ARE LOTS AND LOTS OF
GOOD QUALITIES ABOUT IT.
AS TO EXACTLY WHAT WILL
HAPPEN TO IT FROM NOW ON
IS DIFFICULT TO TELL.
(CHOIR SINGING)
DOMINIC HAS A PURE HIGH
VOICE, BUT IT WON'T LAST.
(CHOIR SINGING)
BEHIND THE ADAMS APPLE,
ABOUT FIVE CENTIMETERS
DOWN FROM THE BACK OF
THE TONGUE LIE THE VOCAL
CORDS.
AS THE BOY GROWS THE
MUSCLES STRETCHED ACROSS THE
WINDPIPE GROW LONGER
AND THE VOICE GETS VERY
UNRELIABLE AND
FINALLY DEEPER.
BEHIND A MAN'S ADAMS APPLE
LIE VOCAL CORDS HALF AS
LONG AGAIN AS A BOYS.
SO WHEN WILL DOMINIC'S
VOICE FORCE HIM OUT OF THE
CHOIR HE LOVES.
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
YEARS AGO MOST BOYS STAYED
UNTIL THEY WERE WELL OVER
FOURTEEN YEARS OLD AND
SOME UNTIL THEY
WERE SIXTEEN.
IN TODAY'S CHOIR MOST ARE
GONE BY THE TIME THEY'RE
FOURTEEN LET
ALONE SIXTEEN.
BOY'S VOICES ARE BREAKING
EARLIER THEN EVER BEFORE
BECAUSE PUBERTY'S STARTING
YOUNGER WITH EACH GENERATION.
ITS PROBABLY BECAUSE
TODAY KIDS EAT MORE,
BUT DOMINIC'S ONLY TWELVE
AND A HALF AND SHOULD HAVE
SOME TIME YET.
WHEN DOMINIC'S VOICE DOES
GO THE OUTCOME WILL BE
A LOTTERY, HE MIGHT END UP
A LOVELY DEEP BASS OR HE
MIGHT LOSE HIS SINGING
VOICE ALTOGETHER.
NOW, UNFORTUNATELY THE
SUMMER HOLIDAYS ARE HERE
AND TEENAGERS DEVELOP
FASTER IN THE SUMMER THEN
ANY OTHER TIME
OF THE YEAR.
DADDY, I NEED MORE MUD,
I'M MAKING THE BIKE JUMP.
DAMN IT.
A DIET OF PLAYING,
SLEEPING AND EATING MAKES
HIM GROW MORE.
THAT WAS PERFECT.
CHIN UP A LITTLE BIT.
DOMINIC IS NO EXCEPTION.
ITS SEPTEMBER AND
HE'S IN HOSPITAL,
HIS VOCAL CORDS ARE BEING
EXAMINED WITH A SPECIAL
CAMERA.
GIVE ME A LOW SOUND E
EEEEEH
SUPER, CAN YOU SING THE
SCALE FOR ME STARTING LOW
GOING UP.
(SINGS SCALE)
I CAN'T SING
ANYTHING LIKE I USE TO,
I USE TO SING A TOP C BUT, I
CAN'T DO THAT ANY MORE AND
UM EVERY TIME I SING A TOP
NOTE FOR A LONG TIME JUST
NOTHING COMES
OUT AFTER AWHILE.
TRY MID-RANGE NOW.
AAAAAAAA
DOMINIC'S VOCAL CORDS
HAVE STARTED TO GROW
HIGHER NOTE
AAAAA
DIFFICULTY HITTING
THAT ONE... OKAY,
DOMINIC'S GOT VERY
RAPID CHANGES GOING ON
IN THE VOICE BOX
AND HE REALLY HAS TO LEARN
TO ADAPT AND USE HIS VOICE
HE'S HAD A LOT OF TRAINING
IN SINGING VOICE AND
THAT'S GOING TO HELP HIM.
BUT, THE RATE OF CHANGE
IS HARD TO COPE WITH.
IT'S A COMPLETE NEW
BIT OF KID IN A WAY.
IT'S LIKE LEARNING A
MUSICAL INSTRUMENT,
YOU HAVE TO PRACTICE AT
IT SO THE COORDINATION ISN'T
THERE YET.
COME DOWN.
(SINGS SCALES DOWN)
(DOMINIC SINGS A LONG NOTE
AND THEN SINGS A SONG)
AMAZINGLY, DOMINIC
HAS A CHOICE,
VOICE BREAKING IS THE ONLY
PART OF PUBERTY THAT CAN
BE DELAYED, BUT ONLY BY
HARD WORK AND WILL POWER.
WITH BOY TREBLES, IT'S
THE DESIRE TO CARRY ON,
THE WILL TO WANT TO SING.
WHEN THEY GET TO THIS STAGE
PARTICULARLY BECAUSE IF
THEY DON'T I THINK THE
VOICE CAN JUST GO STRAIGHT
AWAY.
SO THAT'S VERY MUCH
ACCORDING TO THE CHARACTER
AND TEMPERAMENT OF
THE INDIVIDUAL CHORISTER.
JUST AT THE END OF THE
PHRASE BEFORE HIS PRESENTS
YOU JUST SLIGHTLY LOST IT.
WHEN YOU RETURN TO THE NOTE...
AND JUST START IT...
TROUBLE IS IN THE MIDDLE
OF PUBERTY THE TEENAGE
TEMPERAMENT IS ABOUT AS RELIABLE
AS A BOY'S SINGING VOICE.
ITS QUITE STRESSFUL
BEING IN THE CHOIR,
BECAUSE IF I WANT TO STAND
A CHANCE OF BEING ONE OF
THE MOST SENIOR BOYS IN
THE CHOIR I HAVE TO BE REALLY
WELL BEHAVED.
WHICH WOULD BE
A BIG TASK.
HEY, THIS IS MY ROOM,
THIS WHERE I KINDA GO,
YOU KNOW, AFTER
THE SCHOOL DAY.
YOU KNOW, THERE ARE LOTS
OF PRESSURES IN SCHOOL AND
EVERYTHING, SO YOU KNOW
I JUST LIE ON THE BED AND
REFLECT ON THE DAY, JUST
LISTEN TO MY TUNES AND
THINK ABOUT STUFF.
JUST FIGHT.
LOOK AT HIS MOVES
HIS FAST AGILITY
JESSIE IS FOURTEEN HE'S
ALREADY GOT THE DEEP VOICE
OF A MAN AND HIS BODY
IS WELL INTO THE GROWTH
SPURT.
JESSIE, THE WINNER.
I THINK WHAT I
LIKE BEST SO FAR
ABOUT THE CHANGING
IN MY BODY IS UH
PROBABLY THE HEIGHT
OR UH THE
MASCULINITY,
THE RISING LEVELS OF
TESTOSTERONE IN JESSIE'S
BLOOD ARE DRIVING HIM TO
THE NEXT STAGE OF PUBERTY.
HIS MUSCLES ARE CHANGING .
UNDER THE SKIN MUSCLES ARE
MADE UP OF THOUSANDS OF
HAIR-LIKE FIBERS
THAT WORK TOGETHER.
TESTOSTERONE MAKES EACH
FIBER GROW BROADER AND
LONGER AND THE EFFECTS OF
THE HORMONES ARE MASSIVELY
INCREASED BY EXERCISE.
THOUGH THE NUMBER OF
FIBERS DOESN'T CHANGE.
JESSIE HAS THE SAME NUMBER
OF MUSCLE FIBERS TODAY AS
HE DID WHEN HE WAS BORN.
BUT, ITS NOT JUST MUSCLES
THAT ARE CHANGING THE
SYSTEM THAT POWERS
THEM IS GROWING TOO.
IN HIS LUNGS THERE ARE
EVERMORE AIR SACS TO
CHANNEL OXYGEN
INTO THE BLOOD.
IN THE BLOOD THE
CONCENTRATION OF RED CELLS
GOES UP BY A QUARTER SO
MORE OXYGEN CAN BE CARRIED
AND THE HEART ITSELF
DOUBLES IN VOLUME.
EACH BEAT SENDS MORE
OXYGEN AROUND THE BODY TO
FUEL HIS MUSCLES.
THIS MEANS JESSIE'S
STRENGTH AND STAMINA ARE
GREATER THAN EVER BEFORE,
HE'S READY FOR ANYTHING.
(MUSIC)
JESSIE AND HIS FRIENDS
NEW STRENGTH HAS GIVEN
THEM GREAT CONFIDENCE.
BUT, PUBERTY DOESN'T
ALWAYS RUN SO SMOOTHLY.
IT'S SIX MONTHS
SINCE WE LAST SAW MARK,
AT THIRTEEN AND A HALF, ONLY
SIX MONTHS YOUNGER THAN
JESSIE HE'S WELL INTO THE
AGE WHEN MOST BOYS ARE
GROWING FAST.
BUT MARK HAS
STILL NOT STARTED.
IT'S EATING ME UP INSIDE.
I'M NOT GROWING...
AND I WANT TO GROW.
CAUSE, IF I GROW, I
MIGHT BE MORE LIKED.
I MIGHT NOT BE KNOWN
AS THE LITTLE MIDGET
IN 9K. I MIGHT BE KNOWN AS
THE BOY FROM 9K CALLED MARK..
HOW MUCH ARE THE CRISPS.
EVEN IF MARK CATCHES
UP IN A FEW YEARS BEING A
LATE DEVELOPER MAY WELL LEAVE
LASTING MAY WELL LEAVE
LASTING EMOTIONAL SCARS.
HEY GUESS WHAT...
YOU CAN GET MUGGED. YOU CAN
GET BULLIED.
THEY'RE ALFECOME AROUND ON
THEIR BIKES. LOOK AT EVERY
ONE, AND THINK
I'M THE KING, YOU
MOVE OUT OF MY WAY.
THEY LOOK OUT FOR THE SMALLER
PEOPLE, AND THEY GO FOR THE
SMALLER PEOPLE, AND IF THEY
SEE THAT YOU ARE AN EASY
TARGET, YOU'RE DONE FOR.
BULLYING WAS NOT
THE ONLY PROBLEM.
LATE DEVELOPERS USUALLY
DO WORSE AT SCHOOL THEY'RE
LESS POPULAR THAN OTHER
BOYS AND THEY LACK ANOTHER
FUNDAMENTAL
TEENAGE TALENT.
IF YOU THINK ABOUT IT, WHAT
DO YOU PREFER TO BE?
WOULD YOU PREFER TO BE SHORT OR
WOULD YOU PREFER TO BE TALL.
OK THIS IS WHAT ITS
LIKE TO WAKE JESSIE UP IN
THE MORNING
NINETY PERCENT OF
TEENAGERS FIND IT HARD TO
GET UP IN THE MORNING.
HEY,
SMALL WONDER WHEN YOU
CONSIDER WHAT HAPPENS AT
NIGHT.
I COULD STAY UP PRETTY
LATE AND LIKE NOT FEEL SLEEPY,
GENERALLY, I LIKE,
I JUST STAY UP LATE AND
WATCH MOVIES AND JUST FALL
ASLEEP WHENEVER YOUR TIRED.
HEY GET UP.
TURN IT OFF?
GET UP
THERE AND JUMP ON HIM.
(WHISTLE, WHISTLE)
THERE YOU GO.
MARY CARSKADON IS A
LEADING AUTHORITY ON
TEENAGE SLEEP.
THE PERFECT SLEEPERS
ARE PROBABLY EIGHT OR NINE
YEAR OLDS.
WHO SLEEP JUST
SOLID ALL NIGHT LONG.
WHEN THEY WAKE-UP THEY'RE
AWAKE AND ALERT ALL DAY
LONG AND THEN WHEN IT'S BEDTIME
THEY'RE READY FOR SLEEP
AND THEY GO RIGHT TO SLEEP AND
SLEEP THROUGH THE NIGHT.
WHAT WE FIND IN THE
TEENAGERS IS THAT
SOMETHING MAY BE HAPPENING
THAT'S CHANGING THE TIMING
MECHANISM INSIDE
THE BRAIN.
A DINGY UNDERGROUND
CELLAR IS NOT TO
EVERYONE'S TASTE.
BUT THE BOYS
ARE IN HEAVEN,
HERE THEY CAN SLEEP AS
LONG AS THEY LIKE.. THE
ONLY DRAW BACK IS THAT
MARY AND HER TEAM WILL BE
WATCHING THEIR EVERY MOVE
AND RECORDING THEIR BRAIN
WAVES THROUGHOUT
THE NIGHT.
NOW, GET INTO A
COMFORTABLE SLEEPING
POSITION.
WHEN WE TURN OFF YOUR
LIGHTS PLEASE LIE QUIETLY
KEEP YOUR EYES CLOSED
AND TRY TOALL ASLEEP.
GOOD NIGHT.
EVEN THOUGH THERE AREN'T
ANY DISTRACTIONS AT 10:30
THE BOYS ARE FINDING
IT HARD TO SETTLE.
THERE IS A CLUE TO
WHY IN THEIR SALA.
THE TEAM ARE LOOKING
FOR TRACES OMELATONIN.
THE HORMONE OF
DARKNESS, IT'S THE HORMONE
THAT TELLS THE BRAIN
ITS NIGHT TIME.
IN THE YEARS BEFORE
PUBERTY CHILDREN RELEASE
MELATONIN INTO THE BLOOD
STREAM AT AROUND NINE IN
THE EVENING BY TEN O'CLOCK
MOST OF THEM ARE SOUND
ASLEEP AND THEY'LL STAY
THAT WAY FOR A FULL TEN
HOUR
WHEN PUBERTY KICKS IN
THINGS CHANGAND NOT
ENTIRELY FORHE BETTER.
IN A TEENAGERS BRAIN THE
BODY CLOCKS SHIFT TO THE
ADULT TIME MELATONIN IS
NOT RELEASED UNTIL TEN
THIRTY WHICH MEANS THAT
THEIR BODIES ARE NOT READY
FOR SLEEP UNTIL
AFTER ELEVEN.
THE TROUBLE IS WHILE
THEY'RE GROWING TEENAGERS
STILL NEED A FULL
TEN HOURS SLEEP.
SO, WHEN THE WORLD SAYS
ITS TIME TO GET UP THEIR
BRAINS STILL THINK IT'S
THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT.
JESSIE YOU GOTTA GET UP
ITS LIKE WAY AFTER SIX.
I'M UP.
YOUR NOT UP,
TURN THE CAMERA OFF
UP IS LIKE STANDING UP,  TELL
HIM MAX, TELL HIM GET UP.
FIVE NIGHTS A WEEKHEIR
SLEEPING ONE AND HALF,
TO TWO AND HALF EVEN THREE
HOURS A NIGHT LESS THEN
THEY NEED.
AS A RESULT, THEY
PILE-UP AN ENORMOUS SLEEP
DEBT AND ITS LIKE
WALKING AROUND WITH THIS
BIG GRAY CLOUD
AROUND THEIR HEAD.
TURN THE CAMERAFF OR
I'LL THROW A SHOE AT YOU.
DON'T HIT THE CAMERA
NOW, OW...
GOOD MORNING JESSIE.
JESSIE'S NOW STARTED
HIGH SCHOOL WHICH MEANS
THAT AT 7 O'CLOCK
IN THE MORNING,
LIKE TEENAGERS ALL OVER
THE USA HE'S ON HIS WAY TO
SCHOOL.
(MUSIC)
IT'S HARD,T'S JUST
LIKE YOU'RE SO TIRED
I KNOW WHAT YOU MEAN.
HAVE YOU TURNED IN YOUR
PAPERS FOR MATH?
YOU WAKE UP,
YOU GET READY,
AND BEFORE TO LONG YOU'RE
LIKE IYOUR CSS,
YOUR FIRST PERIOD CLASS
AND YOU'RE JUST LIKE,
AND YOU GET LIKE YOU
JUST CAN'TAKE IT.
ITS MISERABLE SOMETIMES
BUT, YOU KNOW,
YOU GOTTA GET
THROUGH THE DAY.
ITS AN OPEN CIRCLE, IN
WHICH DIRECTION DOES THE
LINE GO.
WHEN MARY CARSKADON
PERSUADED THE SCHOOLS
IN ONE STATE TO START AN
HOUR AND A HALF LATER,
NOT ONLY DID THE
STUDENTS SHOW-UP
FOR CLASS MORE OFTEN,
THEIR GRADES IMPROVED.
THE EXTRA SLEEP ALSO HAD
A POSITIVE EFFECT ON THE
STUDENTS MOODS LACK
OF SLEEP PLAYS A BIG PART
IN TEENAGERSAD MOODS.
EVEN MORVAN'S COLLEGE
CHOIR HAS ONE EXAMPLE OF A
IRRITABLE TEENAGER.
WHEN PEOPLE SHOUT AT ME,
YOU CAN'T SAY ANYTHING BACK
AT ALL.
AND I USE TO BE FINE WITH
THAT BUT NOW IT'S HARD NOT
TO SAY ANYTHING.
DOMINIC IS NOW THIRTEEN
AND HE'S NOT GETTING ON AS
WELL AS HE USE TO.
WHEN HE WAS LITTLE
HE DIDN'T NOTICE THE
DISCIPLINE IT WAS WH
HE DID NOW HE STARTING TO
QUESTION IT AS
HE'S GETTING OLDER.
AND, AS HE QUESTIONS IT HE
REALIZES ITS NOT WHAT HE
WANTS OR WHAT HE'S
COMFORTABLE WITH.
THE CHOIR MASTER
HAD A GO AT ME.
I SANG A BIT WRONG AND HE
JUST WENT SKITS AT ME AND
SHOUTED AT ME.
AND, SO I ANSWERED
BACK TO HIM,
AND HE WENT APE, AND
HE REALLY GOT MAD.
AS I GOT OLDER... LESS AND
LESS SCARED OF HIM, SEE.
MUST BE I'M GROWING
UP OR SOMETHING.
EVEN THOUGH DOMINIC'S
VOICE HAS NOT FINISHED
BREAKING EVERY ONE AGREES
ITS TIME FOR HIM TO LEAVE
THE CHOIR.
TONIGHT IS HIS
LAST SERVICE.
ITS VERY MUCH AN
END OF AN ERA FOR DOM,
IT'S THE END OF
AN ERA FOR US.
YES, YES I'LL CRY.
(MUSIC)
LEAVING THE CHOIR MADE
A MASSIVE CHANGE TO
DOMINIC'S LIFE AFTER ALL
HE'S DEDICATED TWENTY
HOURS A WEEK TO IT FOR
THE PAST FOUR YEARS.
AT FIRST NOT HAVING
ANYTHING TO DO WAS REALLY
QUITE STRANGE AND THE
FIRST SATURDAY WHEN I
DIDN'T GO IN TO SING WAS
LIKE WHAT SHOULD I DO?
I HAVE NOTHING TO DO.
BUT I'VE WORKED OUT
HOW TO USE MY TIME.
(MUSIC)
AWAY FROM THE DISCIPLINE
OF THE CHOIR DOMINIC
SWIFTLY LOST CONTROL
OF HIS VOICE.
IT WAS EMBARRASSING.
WHEN SOMEONE LAUGHS AT YOU.
(LOUD SQUEAK)
IT'S JUST LIKE A REALLY
LOAD SQUEAK AND ITS
AHHHHHHHHHHHHH
OK, COME ON
GET TOGETHER, SMILE
LOOK LIKE YOU'RE
ENJOYING YOURSELVES.
WHEN DOMINIC'S VOICE
FINALLY SETTLES DOWN IT'S
QUALITY WILL DEPEND ON
MORE THEN JUST HIS VOCAL
CORDS.
THE SHAPE OF HIS FACE
WILL ALSO PLAY A PART.
OPEN YOUR
EYES, LOOK UP,
OK, I'LL TAKE
A PICTURE NOW.
DOMINIC HAS COME TO
LONDON WITH THE FAMILY TO
HAVE HIS FACE SCANNED
AT THE EASTMAN DENTAL
INSTITUTE.
HERE THEY CAN PREDICT WHAT
HE WILL LOOK LIKE AS HE
DEVELOPS INTO A MAN.
(MUSIC)
SO THIS IS OUR SCAN WE
HAVE JUST TAKEN, HERE IT IS
JUST LIKE THE REST OF
THE BODY A BOY'S FACE
GOES THROUGH A
GROWTH SPURT.
FIRST, THE JAW GROWS WIDER
AS THEY DEVELOP A FULL SET OF
ADULT TEETH THEN TESTOSTERONE
WORKS ON THE BONES IN THE
NOSE AND JAW.
THEY GROW TWICE AS FAST
AS THE REST OF THE FACE.
THE COMPUTER CAN
LOOK INTO THE FUTURE.
SO, WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN
TO DOMINIC'S FACE?
THIS IS HOW HE WILL
LOOK AT TWENTY.
AHHH
DURING PUBERTY HE WILL
DEVELOP THE LONGER FACE
AND THE CHISELED
JAW OF A YOUNG MAN.
ADD A FEW WRINKLES AND
SOME STUBBLE AND HE'S EVEN
OLDER.
(LAUGHTER)
THAT'S RAW
THAT'S SCARY.
THAT'S REALLY QUITE ODD.
THAT'S WEIRD...
HE LOOKS SO MUCH LIKE
DAD, IT'S JUST FUNNY.
WRINKLES AROUND THE
EYES AND THE FOREHEAD.
HOW WOULD YOU FEEL IF
YOU WOUND-UP LOOKING LIKE
THAT?
OH, I GUESS I
COULD LOOK WORSE COULDN'T I?
I GUESS THAT IS FAIR.
WERE YOU PLANNING
TO GROW A BEARD?
I DON'T KNOW.
NOT ANY MORE.  HA, HA, HA
HEY I GOT HAIR
ON MY LEGS NOW,
NO YOU DON'T,
I'VE STARTED NOTICING
HAIR IN WEIRD PLACES,
(LAUGHTER)
(MUSIC)
THAT'S RIGHT, HEY...
ARE YOU SITTING AT HOME.
YEAH WISH YOU
WERE SOMEWHERE ELSE.
LIKE OUT ON A DATE.
OR DO YOU HAVE
WOMAN PROBLEMS?
(MUSIC)
THE WHOLE POINT OF
PUBERTY IS TO PREPARE
TEENAGERS TO REPRODUCE.
THEY LIKE A SIX PACK
THEY LIKE THE MUSCLES
BECAUSE ALL OF THE
GIRLS THAT I TALK TO...
BECAUSE IT
JUST SO HAPPENS, THAT I AM...
THAT'S RIGHT, A LADIES MAN.
(LAUGHTER)
BY THE AGE OF FIFTEEN
SIGNIFICANT CHANGES HAVE
GONE INSIDE A
BOYS BODY.
THE GENITALS HAVE FINISHED
DEVELOPING AND THE VOLUME
OF THE TESTICLES
HAS GONE UP BY 400%.
INSIDE HAVE GROWN A
TANGLE OF TINY TUBES,
MINIATURE FACTORIES THAT
TURN OUT SPERM ON A
MASSIVE SCALE, A
THOUSAND EVERY SECOND.
WITH A THERMAL CAMERA YOU
CAN SEE WHY THE TESTES ARE
WHERE THEY ARE.
THE RED OF THE STOMACH
SHOWS THAT ITS HOT,
THE BITS COLORED GREEN
AND BLUE ARE COOLER.
SPERM PRODUCTION
WORKS BEST AT LOWER
TEMPERATURES WHICH IS WHY
THE TESTES ARE DESIGNED TO
HANG LOW.
AND, ITS AT THIS TIME THAT
THE PENIS DEVELOPS A MIND
OF ITS OWN.
WHEN YOU SEE A HOT GIRL
ON TV YOU SHOOT UP FROM FOUR
INCHES TO SEVEN INCHES
IN FIVE SECONDS.
I REMEMBER A FEW TIMES IN
EIGHTH GRADE WE'D BE GOING OUT
THERE AND WE WERE WEARING
OUR SWEATS AND STUFF,
OH MY GOD, IT WOULD BE
LIKE... THERE'D BE GIRLS
OUT THERE AND STUFF AND I'D BE
LIKE OH CRAP ITS COMING I GOT
TO TUCK THAT IN SOMEWHERE..
YOU'D WAKE UP WITH ONE
AND YOUR MOM'S LIKE
GET IN THE SHOWER,
FIVE MORE MINUTES,
I HAVE TO WAIT...
WAIT FOR WHAT?
UM, NOTHING...
(LAUGHTER)
YOU'RE WALKING IN
LIKE, SIDE WAYS, LIKE...
THE ERECTIONS ARE HARDLY
A MATTER OF CHOICE,
INSIDE THE PENIS IS MADE
OF SPONGY TISSUE THAT'S
FILLED WITH THOUSANDS
OF TINY BLOOD VESSELS.
USUALLY, BLOOD FLOWS IN
AND OUT AT A NORMAL RATE.
DURING AN ERECTION BLOOD
FLOW INTO THE PENIS
INCREASES DRAMATICALLY.
THE BLOOD VESSELS AT THE
BASE GET SQUEEZED SO WHILE
BLOOD CAN FLOW IN IT
CANNOT AS EASILY FET OUT.
THE PRESSURE
BUILDS-UP INSIDE.
THE THERMAL CAMERA SHOWS
THE HEAT PRODUCED BY ALL
THAT EXTRA TRAPPED BLOOD.
NOW, THE EQUIPMENT IS
ALL IN PLACE ITS READY TO
OPERATE.
THE FIRST TIME THAT
HAPPENS IS USUALLY AT
NIGHT.
I DIDN'T KNOW
WHAT HAD HAPPENED,
I WOKE UP AND MY
BOXERS WERE DAMP,
AND I WAS LIKE... WHAT'S GOING
ON... IT'S LIKE... IT'S LIKE...
I DIDN'T WET
MYSELF, I KNOW THAT,
IT'S JUST LIKE, OH WELL, JUST
THROW IT IN THE WASH AND
EVERYTHING'S TAKEN CARE OF.
LIKE WHEN IT FIRST HAPPENS
YOU KNOW WHAT'S GOING ON
RIGHT, SO YOU CAN CONTROL
YOUR BODILY FUNCTIONS
OR WHATEVER, YOU KNOW WHAT
TO DO NOW AND, YOU SHOULD,
YOU KNOW THAT IT IS NOT
GOING TO BE AN ACCIDENT
NO-MORE OR WHATEVER..
ARE YOUR TRYING TO TELL
ME THAT YOU'VE STARTED TO
MASTURBATE?
YES THAT
WHAT I'M SAYING.
(LAUGHTER)
THEY JUST THINK
ABOUT IT ALL THE TIME,
I KNOW FOR A FACT THEY
THINK ABOUT IT A LOT OF
THE TIME BECAUSE I
HAVE TWO BROTHERS.
(LAUGHTER)
OH MY GOD. WE'RE EATING AND
YOU'RE THINKING ABOUT SEX.
IN THE UNITED KINGDOM A
QUARTER OF TEENAGERS HAVE
HAD SEX BEFORE
THEY'RE SIXTEEN.
IN THE UNITED STATES
ALMOST HALF OF THEM HAVE.
BUT, BOY-GIRL
RELATIONSHIPS ARE NOT JUST
ABOUT SEX THE EMOTIONAL
SIDE CHANGES AS WELL.
AT HIGH SCHOOL ITS
STARTING TO HAPPEN FOR
JESSIE.
HAVE YOU GOT A GIRLFRIEND?
NO COMMENT.
I'M NOT TIED DOWN.
YEAH HE IS.
YEAH YOU ARE,
YOU'RE WHIPPED DUDE.
AT FIFTEEN JESSIE'S NATURAL
INCLINATIONS ARE LEADING
HIM TOWARDS THE
ADULT WORLD BUT,
WILL THE ADULT
SOCIETY LET HIM IN.
DO TEENAGERS GET THE
CHALLENGES THEY NEED.
YOU CAN'T DO MUCH CAN
YOU WHEN YOUR ONLY SIXTEEN?
YOU CAN'T GET A JOB BECAUSE
YOUR STILL IN SCHOOL,
WHEN YOU WANT A PROPER JOB THAT
PAYS A DECENT WAGE SO YOU CAN
GO OUT TO THE CLUBS...
YOU CAN'T DRIVE... AND YOU
WON'T BE ABLE TO DRIVE...
GET ME OWN CAR...
AND GO ALL OVER.
MATTHEW LIKE MANY
FIFTEEN YEAR OLDS
IS BOTH PHYSICALLY
DEVELOPED AND ANGRY,
PERHAPS WITH GOOD REASON.
IN THE LAST FIFTY YEARS
TEENAGERS HAVE BEEN
ALLOWED TO LESS AND LESS,
AND TEENAGE CRIME RATES
HAVE ROCKETED.
TODAY 80 PERCENT OF
ADOLESCENTS ADMIT TO SOME
CRIME OR OTHER.
WE'RE LIKE HIP
HOP KIDS, YOU KNOW,
GO TO UNDERGROUND
PARTIES, DRUGS, ALCOHOL.
EVERYONE DRINKS UNDERAGE.
SOMETIMES THEY
TAKE THINGS, LIKE DRINKS.
THERE'S AT THREE
FIGHTS EVERY DAY.
WE TAKE, CHOCOLATE
BARS, TAKE CHEWING GUM
IT'S JUST LIKE, ITS THERE,
EVERYBODY'S LIKE "HEY THIS IS
COOL" AND YOUR LIKE I'M
JUST GOING TO TRY IT ONCE,
AND THAT'S IT JUST
TO SEE WHAT ITS LIKE.
YOU DON'T WANT TO DO
IT OVER, AND OVER,
AND OVER UNTIL
YOU'VE TRY IT.
SHUT UP MAN.
CHILDREN THAT FAIL
TO GET INTO ANY TROUBLE
DURING ADOLESCENTS ARE
AN INFINITESIMALLY SMALL
MINORITY.
IN ACTUAL FACT THE YOUNG
PEOPLE WHO MAKE IT ALL THE
WAY THROUGH ADOLESCENCE
WITHOUT ENGAGING IN ANY
KIND OF ILLEGAL, ILLICIT
BEHAVIOR ARE VERY,
VERY FEW AND DON'T TEND TO
ACTUALLY BE A PINNACLE OF
MENTAL HEALTH.
TERRI MOFFITT CONDUCTED
THE BIGGEST EVER STUDY OF
TEENAGE BOYS BEHAVIOR.
SHE FOUND THAT IN THE
DEVELOPED WORLD ONE FIFTH
OF ALL BOYS OFTEN GET
INVOLVED IN CRIME BY THE
TIME THEY'RE EIGHTEEN.
MOST OF MATTHEWS
FRIENDS HAVE BEEN CAUGHT OUT.
SWAPPING CARS
TAKING THEM WITHOUT
ANYONE'S CONSENT
DOING HIJACKS
GETTING CAUGHT FOR
ROBBING A CAR BUT I DIDN'T
GET DONE WITH IT.
STEALING.
TEENAGE BOYS ARE OUT FOR
EXCITEMENT AND TAKING AND
DRIVING AWAY IS A
COMMON WAY TO FIND IT.
IN ROCHDALE IN THE NORTH
OF ENGLAND THEY RUN A PROJECT
WHERE BOYS ON THE EDGE OF CRIME
ARE TAUGHT HOW TO FIX CARS.
IN THE UK YOU CAN'T
LEGALLY DRIVE UNTIL YOU'RE
SEVENTEEN.
FIFTEEN YEAR-OLD MATTHEW
ALREADY HAS SIGNIFICANT
DRIVING EXPERIENCE.
THE MATE FOUND A MOTOR BIKE
AND HE CAME TO MY HOUSE AND
ASKED ME TO GET SOME
PETROL FOR HIM.
SO I WENT OFF AND GOT SOME
PETROL, POURED IT IN AND
HE COULDN'T GET IT STARTED.
SO I GOT IT STARTED FOR HIM.
AND THEN WE HAD A GO ALL OVER.
IT WAS JUST A BUZZ...
THE POLICE CAME TO ME
AND ASKED ME QUESTIONS.
I GOT CAUGHT WITH ME
FINGERPRINTS STUFF AND
EVERYTHING. IT WAS A STOLEN
BIKE AND I GOT CAUGHT FOR IT.
THAT'S LIFE.
THIS ISN'T THE ONLY TIME
MATTHEW'S BEEN IN TROUBLE
WITH THE POLICE, IF THEY
CATCH HIM ONCE MORE HE'LL
END UP IN COURT.
BUT, DOES THIS MEAN HE'S
FACING A LIFE OF CRIME.
IT WOULD BE THE WRONG
THING TO DO TO SEE THIS AS
A SIGN OF A BAD FUTURE
OR A SIGN OF A BAD KID.
WHAT WE'RE SEEING IS YOUNG
PEOPLE DOING THE BEST THEY
CAN TO COPE WITH AN
UNFORTUNATE SITUATION.
THIS SITUATION IS NOT ALSO
DO TO THE FACT THAT KIDS
ARE BORED.
THERE IS ALSO A
BIOLOGICAL CAUSE.
BECAUSE BOYS ARE FED
BETTER AND MATURE MUCH
EARLIER ADOLESCENCE IS
LASTING LONGER THAN EVER
BEFORE.
IT'S A VERY UNPLEASANT
SITUATION TO BE STUCK IN
FOR SUCH A LONG TIME.
WE HAVE NO CLEAR ROLE IN
SOCIETY YOU ARE IN A SENSE
A SUPERFLUOUS MEMBER NO
LONGER A CHILD AND NOT A
PRODUCTIVE ADULT.
TERRI MOFFITT THINKS THIS
FEELING BOYS HAVE THAT
THEY DON'T BELONG IS WHAT
SENT TEENAGE CRIME SOARING
OFF THE SCALE.
THE MATURITY GAP
AFFECTS BOYS AND GIRLS.
BUT, BOYS COMMIT
FAR MORE CRIME,
AND THERE'S ONE CLEAR
DIFFERENCE THAT MIGHT
ACCOUNT FOR IT.
ITS TESTOSTERONE AGAIN.
AS WELL AS MAKING BOYS
MORE PHYSICAL INCREASED
LEVELS OF TESTOSTERONE IN
THE BLOOD MAKES THEM VERY
COMPETITIVE.
I'VE COME FROM A QUIET
VARIETY OF SCHOOL
YOU GET REPUTATION
AT SCHOOL,
YOU CAN GET REPUTATIONS FOR LIKE
IF YOU BOTHER AN ODD PERSON,
SOMEONE ODDER THAN MOST PEOPLE
THEN YOU BOTHER THEN YOU GET A
REPUTATION AS BEING REALLY ODD.
FOR BOYS RESPECT
IS CRUCIAL.
IN ROCHDALE THE YOUTH
PROJECT WORKS HARD TO GIVE
THEM A LEGAL WAY FOR GETTING
IT AND IT'S REMARKABLY
EFFECTIVE.
SINCE ITS BEEN RUNNING
ARRESTS OF TEENAGERS IN
THE AREA ARE
DOWN 60 PERCENT.
MATTHEW'S BECOME DJ AT THE
SPORTS CLUB AND HE STAYED
OUT OF TROUBLE FOR
MORE THAN A YEAR.
(MUSIC)
FOR MOST TEENAGE BOYS
THERE IS HOPE A SMALL
PERCENTAGE CARRY ON
OFFENDING BUT THE VAST
MAJORITY JUST
GROW OUT OF IT.
WE WILL BEGIN SERVICE
WITH THE SINGING OF MATAVU
WHICH YOU'LL FIND ON
THE BOTTOM OF PAGE ONE.
AS I SAID IT WILL REPEAT
SEVERAL TIMES AND YOU WILL
FIND YOURSELF
BACK IN MANHATTAN
ITS ANDY'S BIG DAY.
HE'S THIRTEEN YEARS OLD
AND IT'S HIS BAR MITZVAH.
TRADITIONALLY IN THE JEWISH
FAITH THIRTEEN IS WHEN A
BOY BECOMES A MAN.
AS MY FRIEND SAID
DON'T WORRY HENDRICKS
THERE'S NO PRESSURE ON YOU
HAVE DO IS GO UP THERE AND
LEAD THE SERVICE IN FRONT
OF A HUNDRED ODD PEOPLE.
NOT ONLY DOES ANDY HAVE
TO LEAD THE SERVICE HE HAS
TO DO IT IN A FOREIGN
LANGUAGE, HEBREW.
(SINGING IN HEBREW)
ITS ONE OF THE FEW
FORMAL RITES OF PASSAGE
FROM CHILD TO ADULT THAT
REMAIN IN MODERN SOCIETY.
(SINGING IN HEBREW)
THE BAR MITZVAH CEREMONY
IN ANCIENT DAYS USE TO
SYMBOLIZE A YOUNG PERSON
BECOMING AN ADULT,
BECAUSE AT AGE THIRTEEN
IN FACT THEY DID BECOME
ADULTS.
THEY WOULD MARRY THEY
WOULD HAVE A TRADE,
IT TAKES ON A DIFFERENT
MEANING IN MODERN TIMES.
IN MODERN TIMES THE
SIGNIFICANCE IS LEARNING
AND STUDYING AND ACHIEVING
SOMETHING EXTRAORDINARY.
I'M PROUD
OF HOW I DID,
BUT EVENTUALLY I'M VERY
HAPPY TO GET IT OFF MY
BACK.
IT SOMETHING THAT'S BEEN
FOLLOWING ME FOR A LONG
TIME, THIRTEEN
YEARS OR SO.
OUTSIDE THE SYNAGOGUE
ANDY MUST LIVE BY THE SAME
RESTRICTIONS AS
OTHER TEENAGERS.
FROM TODAY WITHIN HIS
RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY HE'LL
BE TREATED AS AN ADULT.
(MUSIC)
SO AT THE END OF TWO
YEARS AT THE MERCY OF
THEIR BODY'S WHAT
DIFFERENCE HAS PUBERTY
MADE TO EACH OF OUR BOYS.
(MUSIC)
MARK AT NEARLY FOURTEEN
IS STILL NOT GROWING,
WHILE HE WAITS HE'S TAKEN
UP KARATE TO BUILD UP HIS
MUSCLES.
(CHOIR MUSIC)
REMEMBER DOMINIC'S CHOIR
BOY DAYS AT TWELVE HIS
LIFE REVOLVED AROUND THE
CHOIR AND HIS BEAUTIFUL
TREBLE VOICE.
I REALLY ENJOY IT AND
WE WILL BE DISAPPOINTED WHEN
OUR VOICE GETS LOWER BUT
WE'LL STILL BE ABLE TO SING
TENOR AND BASE, SEE.. AS LONG AS
WE CAN STILL SING I'LL THINK
WE'LL BE ALRIGHT.
I'VE GOTTEN RID OF
ALL OF THAT SINGING.
WHEN I SPEAK YOU ALL SHUT UP!
WHEN DOMINIC'S VOICE HAD
FINISHED BREAKING IT WAS A
WHOLE OCTAVE LOWER, HE'S
A TENOR NOW BUT FRANKLY,
HE DOESN'T CARE.
I REALLY DON'T WANT TO
SING, DON'T MAKE ME SING. NO..
PLEASE.
(MUSIC)
NOW DOMINIC PLAYS RUGBY
SIX DAYS A WEEK AND
HE'S RATHER GOOD, HE'S
ALREADY BEEN SELECTED TO
PLAY FOR THE COUNTY.
(MUSIC)
HELLO
OKAY MOVE TOWARDS ME.
WHEN WE FIRST MET ANDY
HE WAS ELEVEN YEARS OLD.
SO IT'S 56. SO, I AM NOW
FOUR FEET AND EIGHT INCHES.
TWO YEARS LATER HE'S
THIRTEEN AND HE'S STILL
CHECKING UP ON HIS GROWTH.
I'M ABOUT TO MEASURE TO
SEE HOW MUCH I HAVE GROWN.
FOUR FEET TEN, BUT
DIDN'T THE DOCTOR SAY YOU
WERE FOUR FEET ELEVEN
YES
WELL THEN THIS MEASUREMENT
IS A BIT SLOPPY.
I BELIEVE I'VE BECOME
SLIGHTLY MORE DISGRUNTLED
AND UM ARGUMENTATIVE, BUT
I ALSO FEEL MORE MATURE
AND I'M COOLERHAN
ANYBODY ELSE.
I FOUR FEET
AND ELEVEN INCHES
CAN I GO BACK TO
SLEEPING IN MY COAT NOW?
MATTHEW HAS GOT A
REGULAR SPOT DJ'ING IN
A PROPER CLUB.
WHEN WE FIRST MET JESSIE
HE WAS ALREADY A TEENAGER
AND HE LOVED IT.
I CAN'T WAIT TO
GO TO HIGH SCHOOL,
I MEAN LIKE ME AND THE
GUYS WE'RE THINKING ABOUT
ALL THE FOOTBALL AND ITS
GOING TO BE HIGH SCHOOL
AND IT'S GOING TO BE...
WE'RE IN THE BIG TIMES NOW.
RECENTLY, JESSIE
TURNED SWEET SIXTEEN.
I'VE BECOME A LITE
BIT MORE POLITICALLY AWARE,
I TOTALLY FEEL THAT
SOMEBODY SHOULD BE WHO
THEY WANT TO BE.
I'M NOT LOOKING FOR ATTENTION OR
ANYTHING LIKE THAT I DRESS
LIKE THIS BECAUSE
THIS IS WHO I AM.
ALONG WITH HIS IMAGE
HE'S CHANGED HIS FRIENDS.
MY BAND IS CALLED AH ROLLING
YOUTH, MOSTLY WHAT WE
SING ABOUT IS BELIEF AH, IN
UNITY AND EQUALITY.
A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE
SELLING OUAND GOING TO A
CORPORATE LABEL.
WE'RE NEVER GOING TO GO TO
A CORPORATE LABEL OR WHAT
NOT BECAUSE WHAT WE DO IS
NOT MEANT TO BE EXPENSIVE.
ITS MEANT TO BE LIKE...YOU
KNOW, FOR THE KIDS.
(MUSIC)